 In this video I will give you a high level introduction to Machine Learning. Well, imagine that you’ve obtained a dataset containing characteristics 
of thousands of
human cell samples extracted from patients who were believed to be at risk of developing
cancer. You can use the values of these cell characteristics in samples from other patients to give an
early indication of whether a new sample might be benign or malignant. You should clean your data, select a proper algorithm for building a prediction model,
and train your model to understand patterns of benign or malignant cells within the data. Once the model has been trained by going through data iteratively, it can be used to predict
your new or unknown cell with a rather high accuracy. This is machine learning! It is the way that a machine learning model can do a doctor’s task or 
at least help
that doctor make the process faster. Now, let me give a formal definition of machine learning. Machine learning is the subfield of computer science that gives "computers the ability
to learn without being explicitly programmed.”
Let me explain what I mean when I say “without being explicitly programmed.”
Assume that you have a dataset of images of animals such as cats and dogs, and you want
to have software or an application that can recognize and differentiate them. Prior to machine learning, each image would be transformed to a vector of features. This is when machine learning entered the scene. Using machine learning allows us to build a model that looks at all the feature sets,    
and their corresponding type of animals, and learn it learns the pattern of each animal. It is a model built by machine learning algorithms. In essence, machine learning follows the same process that a 4-year-old child uses to learn,
understand, and differentiate animals. So, machine learning algorithms, inspired by the human learning process, iteratively
learn from data, and allow computers to find hidden insights. Machine Learning impacts society in a very influential way. They use Machine Learning to produce suggestions that you might enjoy! They use machine learning to predict the probability of default for each applicant, and then approve       
or refuse the loan application based on that probability. There are many other applications of machine learning that we see every day in our daily    
life, such as chatbots, logging into our phones or even computer games using face recognition. Each of these use different machine learning techniques and algorithms. The Regression/Estimation technique is used for predicting a continuous value, for example,
predicting things like the price of a house based on its characteristics, or to estimate
the Co2 emission from a car’s engine. A Classification technique is used for Predicting the class or category of a case, for example,
if a cell is benign or malignant, or whether or not a customer will churn. Clustering groups of similar cases, for example, can find similar patients, or can be used
for customer segmentation in the banking field. Association technique is used for finding items or events that often co-occur, for example,
grocery items that are usually bought together by a particular customer. By this point, I’m quite sure this question has crossed your mind, “What is the difference
between these buzzwords that we keep hearing these days, such as Artificial intelligence
(or AI), Machine Learning and Deep Learning?”
Well, let me explain what is different between them. Machine Learning is the branch of AI that covers the statistical part of artificial
intelligence. It teaches the computer to solve problems by looking at hundreds or thousands of examples,
learning from them, and then using that experience to solve the same problem in new situations. And Deep Learning is a very special field of Machine Learning where computers can actually
learn and make intelligent decisions on their own. Deep learning involves a deeper level of automation in comparison with most machine learning algorithms. Now that we’ve completed the introduction to Machine Learning, subsequent videos will
focus on reviewing two main components: First, you’ll be learning about the purpose
of Machine Learning and where it can be applied in the real world; and
Second, you’ll get a general overview of Machine Learning topics, such as supervised
vs unsupervised learning, model evaluation and various Machine Learning algorithms. So now that you have a sense with what’s in store on this journey, let’s continue
our exploration of Machine Learning!
